# The World Wide Web

If we are going to add a server to the world wide web (hereafter just
the “web”) we will need to know how the web works.

The web is a client-server network in which user-agents request
resources from servers. You are used to doing this using a user-agent
called a browser, to get resources you refer to as web pages. The web is
more general than this though. Lots of web traffic, perhaps the
majority, is generated by automated programs, e.g. spiders, requesting
resources rather than humans using browsers, and the resources they
request don’t have to be web pages at all. They may be XML or JSON
files or in fact any resource type the client can process.

Servers provide resources to clients that request them. A typical
webserver runs a tight loop to monitor port 80 (by convention, not
necessity) for requests for resources. Upon receiving a request, it
looks for the resource and sends it out to the client. The resource may
be static, typically a file, or dynamic, typically the output of a
program.

Clients and servers communicate according to HTTP: the HyperText
Transport Protocol. A resource is any chunk of information that can be
identified by a URL (**r**esource is the R in URL). The client and
server sort out the details of their interaction using headers that
specify the formats in which the resource is available (from the
server’s perspective) and acceptable (from the client’s perspective),
the encodings they will use, authorization to access the resource, and
much more.
